add 1.11 release highlights (#2152)
JuliaLang/www.julialang.org: blog/2024/10/julia-1.11-highlights.md

+++

...

The full list of changes can be found in the [NEWS file](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/release-1.11/NEWS.md), but here we'll give a more in-depth overview of some of the release highlights.

\toc

# `Array` now implemented in Julia, new `Memory` type
*Jameson Nash* , *Oscar Smith*

# New `public` keyword
*Lilith Hafner*

# `ScopedValue`
*Valentin Churavy*

# Manifest versioning
*Ian Butterworth*

# Improved tab completion and hinting in the REPL
*Ian Butterworth*, *Shuhei Kadowaki*

Tab completion has become more powerful in 1.11 and gained hinting when there is a singular completion available that can be completed with tab.

(Embed a video like this:)
https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/assets/1694067/6179d799-63f1-47dc-abe2-ac10abb29bc9

If you prefer to not have hinting enabled, disable it via your `startup.jl` with
```
atreplinit() do repl
    if VERSION >= v"1.11.0-0"
        repl.options.hint_tab_completes = false
    end
end
```

# Sources section in Project.toml in Pkg.jl
*Kristoffer Carlsson*

# Precompile file relocatability
*Florian Atteneder*

Enabling relocation of cache files, together with other improvements coming in v1.11,

> paves the way for Pkg.jl to serve cache files in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will help Pkg.jl to serve cache files in the future.
```

Author: I don't think this document is read for line by line comments. Or just push the fixes in that case, it will be a bit too noisy with comments otherwise I think.

To automatically enable relocatability follow [Pkg.jl's Best Practices](https://pkgdocs.julialang.org/v1/creating-packages/#Best-Practices), i.e.
do not assume that your package code ends up in a writeable or stable location.
Instead, utilize existing tools like Artifacts.jl, Scratch.jl or Preferences.jl to
make your package self-contained, immutable and relocatable.

Usage of non-relocatable packages continues to work as before.
Attempting to relocate such a package should only occur re-precompilation overhead.

Pitfalls for relocation:
- Usage of `@__DIR__, @__FILE__` 'burns' absolute paths into package images.
  In general, avoid absolute paths or relative paths outside the package's root directory.

> - Anything else?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Anything else?
```

# New `public` keyword
*Lilith Hafner*

In previous Julia versions, there was no "programmatic way" of knowing if an unexported name was considered part of the public API or not.
Instead, the guideline was basically that if it was not in the manual then it was not public which was a bit underwhelming.
To remedy that, there is now a `public` keyword in Julia that can be used to indicate that an unexported name is part of the public API.
Whether a name is public or not can now be checked with the (public) method `Base.ispublic(m::Module, name::Symbol)`, and this is for example used by
the help system in the REPL to indicate if a documented name is non-public:

```
help?> GC.in_finalizer
  │ Warning
  │
  │  The following bindings may be internal; they may change or be removed in future versions:
  │
  │    •  Base.GC.in_finalizer

  GC.in_finalizer()::Bool

  Returns true if the current task is running a finalizer, returns false otherwise. Will also return false within a finalizer which was inlined by the compiler's eager finalization optimization, or if finalize is called on the finalizer
  directly.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This new feature was presented at JuliaCon and can be seen [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2o8MhoN-3NE)

```

The usage of non-relocatable packages continues to work as before.
Attempting to relocate such a package should only occur re-precompilation overhead.

Pitfalls for relocation:
- Usage of `@__DIR__, @__FILE__` 'burns' absolute paths into package images.
 In general, avoid absolute paths or relative paths outside the package's root directory.

# Stdlib excision
*Valentin Churavy*, *Kristoffer Carlsson*

After the introduction of package-images for native caching in Julia 1.10, we started the process
of moving standard libraries out of the system-image. This produces a smaller Julia system-image
and startup for small scripts being faster.

```
% hyperfine 'julia +1.10 --startup-file=no -e "1+1"'
Benchmark 1: julia +1.10 --startup-file=no -e "1+1"
  Time (mean ± σ):     113.2 ms ±   2.8 ms    [User: 108.9 ms, System: 25.9 ms]
  Range (min … max):   109.2 ms … 117.9 ms    25 runs
```

```
% hyperfine 'julia +1.11 --startup-file=no -e "1+1"'
Benchmark 1: julia +1.11 --startup-file=no -e "1+1"
  Time (mean ± σ):      91.9 ms ±   3.0 ms    [User: 72.5 ms, System: 19.1 ms]
  Range (min … max):    88.7 ms … 100.8 ms    29 runs
```

> Excising standard libraries also intrododuces the opportunity in the future to update standard libraries

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Excising standard libraries also introduces the opportunity in the future to update standard libraries
```

+++
mintoclevel = 2
maxtoclevel = 3
title = "Julia 1.11 Highlights"
authors = "The Julia contributors"
published = "8 October 2024"
rss_pubdate = Date(2024, 10, 08)
rss = """Highlights of the Julia 1.11 release."""
+++

> ...

Reviewer 4: Some random dots?
